I was born and raised in Dakar Senegal
and through a combination of accident
and cosmic justice became a chef in the
US when I first arrived in New York I
began working with restaurants different
types of restaurants from French bistro
to Italian global ethnic to modern
American at the time New York was
already West well established as a food
capital of the world however in the
exception of a few West African and
Ethiopian mom-and-pop eateries there was
no such thing as African cuisine in the
entire city early in my life I was
influenced by Senegal's first president
léopold sédar Senghor nicknamed the poet
president who talked about a new
humanism a universal civilization in
which all cultures will come together
around a communal table as equals each
bringing its own beautiful contribution
to share he called it the rendezvous of
giving and receiving that concept
resonated with me and it has guided my
career path after years of working in
restaurants I heard for my work to have
a deeper impact that will go beyond the
last meal I had served I wanted to give
back both to New York the city that
allowed me the opportunity to follow my
calling but also to my origins and
ancestors in Senegal I wanted to
contribute to that Universal
civilization Sango had described but I
didn't know how to make a measurable
impact as a cook and writer while I was
writing my first cookbook I often
traveled to different regions of Senegal
for research during one of those trips
in the remote southeast region of kodoku
and we discovered an ancient grain
called for no that had all but
disappeared from the urban senegalese
diet it turns out that fonio had been
cultivated for more than 5,000 years and
is probably the oldest cultivated cereal
in africa once a popular grain in much
of the continent fauna was grown all the
way to ancient Egypt where
archaeologists found grains inside
pyramids burial grounds today it is
mostly coastal cultivated in the western
part of the Sahel region from Senegal to
Mali Burkina Faso Togo Nigeria the Sahel
region is that part semi-arid area south
of the Sahara Desert that if tens from
the Atlantic in the west to the Red Sea
in the East I became more interested
about this grain that was deemed worth
taking to the afterlife by early
Egyptians as I continued my research I
found out that fonio was actually
wherever it was cultivated there was
always some myths or some superstition
connected to it the Dogon another great
culture in Mali called the PO or the
seed of the universe in that ancient
cultures mythology the entire universe
sprouted from a seed of fonio aside from
its purported mystical properties phono
is a miracle grains in many aspects it
is nutritious particularly rich in
methionine and cysteine - amino acids
that are deficient in most other major
grains barley rice or wheat to name a
few in addition for new cultivation is
great for the environment
it tolerates poor soil and needs very
little water thriving were
thing else will grow as a chef what
first struck me was its delicate taste
and its versatility similar to couscous
vano has a delicious nutty and earthy
flavor it can be turned into salad
served as noodles used in baking or
simply as a substitute in any other
grains in your favorite recipes I am
happy to share some of my phone your
sushi and sweet potato sushi with some
of you right now which is an okra
[Applause]
hey kado boo it is also nicknamed yummy
boom which means food for royalty and
it's served for guests of honor located
at the border with Guinea and Mali
kay do boo first strikes visitors with a
stunning vistas and views of the footage
yellow mountains sadly it is also one of
the poorest regions of senegal because
of the certification and lack of job
prospects much of kodoku young
population has left
they chose the deadly path of migration
in search of better opportunities often
they risk their lives trying to reach
Europe some live by crossing the Sahara
Desert Fathers embark on inadequate
wooden canoes in desperate attempts to
reach Spain according to a recent
Guardian article by 2020 more than 60
million people from sub-saharan Africa
will expected to migrate due to
desertification
this is the biggest global wave of
migration since the Second World War and
is only set to grow so far this year
more than 2,100 migrants have lost their
lives on their way to Europe this is the
reality of Thiago and of much of the
Sahel today scary future scarce food and
no opportunities to change the situation
if life in your village were so
precarious if there was a way to having
enough food to get by or having a paying
job if you and your sister didn't have
to spend 30 percent of their waking
hours waking hours fetching water if
conditions were just a little more
hospitable
could the solution be right here in our
soil could bringing fonio to the rest of
the world be the answer ancient grains
are getting more popular and sales of
gluten-free items are growing in the
u.s. sixteen point four percent since
2013 making it a twenty-three point
three billion dollars industry how could
phone yo partake in this market share
there are many challenges in turning
phone.you into food traditional
processing is laborious and
time-consuming especially when compared
to other grains well thankfully
technology has evolved and there are now
machines back until four know in a more
efficient way and as a matter of fact a
few years ago Sanusi Jackie T a
Senegalese engineer won a Rolex Prize
for his invention of the first
mechanized on your processor today such
machines are making life much easier to
group for producers around the whole
Sahel region another challenge is the
colonial mentality that what comes from
the West is best this tendency to look
down at our own products and to see
crops like fonio as simply country
people's food therefore substandard
explains why even though we don't
produce wheat in senegal traditionally
it is far easier to find baguettes or
croissants in the streets of dhaka than
it is to find any for new products the
same mindset popularized the over
processed leftover rice they breathe
known as broken rice which was imported
to Senegal from Indochina and introduced
by the colonial French soon broken rice
became a key
in our national dish jboden replacing
our own traditional more nutritious
african rice or is a global reamer
ironically the same african rice
despised at home was held abroad indeed
during the atlantic slave trade this
price became a major crop in the
americas particularly in the Carolinas
where it was nicknamed Carolina gold but
let's return to for you how can we turn
its current status of country people
food into a world-class crop last year a
business partner and I secured the
commitment from Whole Foods Market the
US is largest natural food store chain
to California and we got a large
American important ingredient importer
interested enough to send a team of
executives to West Africa with us to
explore the supply chains viability we
found ourselves observing manual
operations in remote locations with few
controls of a quality so we started
focusing on processing issues we drew up
a vision with a beneficial and
commercially sustainable supply chain
for for new and we connected ourselves
with organizations that can help us
achieve it walking backwards from the
market here is what it looks like
imagine that fonio is consumed all
across the globe as other popular
ancient grains fonio touted on the
labels of cereals breads nutrition bars
cookies pastors snacks why not it's
easier to say than quinoa
to get their phone you needs to be
readily available at a consistent
quality for commercial users such as
food manufacturers and restaurant chains
that's the part we are missing to make
phone you're available at a consistent
quality for commercial use you need a
commercial scale for your mill that
adheres to international quality
standards currently there is no such
mill in the whole world
so in our vision there is an African
owned and operated for mill that
processes efficiently and in compliance
with the requirements of multinational
food companies it is very difficult for
the folio producers today to sell in
useful unless they devote a huge amount
of time and energy in threshing
winnowing and hosting it in our vision
the mill will take on those tasks
allowing the producers to focus on
farming rather than processing there is
untapped agricultural capacity in the
Sahel and all it takes is changing
market conditions to activate that
capacity by relieving fonio producers of
manual operations the mill will free up
their time and remove the production
bottleneck that limits their output and
there are other benefits as well in
using Sahel land for others for
agriculture more benefits higher
employment climate change mitigation by
reversing the certification and greater
food security nice vision right well we
are working towards getting it done last
month we introduced four new to shoppers
in New York City and online in a package
that makes it attractive and desirable
and accessible
[Music]
we are talking with operators and
investors in West Africa about building
a phony mill and most importantly we
have teamed with an NGO called SOS Sahel
to recruit train and equip swore holders
in the Sahel to increase their fonio
production hunger levels are higher in
sub-saharan Africa than any other place
in the world the Sahel population is set
to grow from 135 million to 340 million
people however in that drought and
famine prone region for new growth
freely this tiny grain may provide big
answers reasserting its doggone name po
the seed of the universe and taking us
one step closer to the universal
civilization
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]